             International Classification of Diseases

                     ---   9th Revision   ---

                       Clinical Modification

                               1998

                            (ICD-9-CM)

                       in Rich Text Format


Note: this document is best viewed in a fixed width font.  

The files listed below include the entire text of "The
International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical
Modification" (ICD-9-CM), Sixth Edition, issued for use beginning
October 1, 1998 for federal fiscal year 1999 (FY99).  The ICD-9-
CM is maintained jointly by the National Center for Health
Statistics (NCHS) and the Health Care Financing Agency (HCFA).  

These files are in Rich Text Format and may be imported into most
word processors with indentation intact.  These files come from
the official version of the ICD-9-CM, which is available on
CD-ROM from the U.S. Government Printing Office, (202) 512-1800,
order number 017-022-01434-3.  This CD-ROM includes Folio
Corporation's VIEWS (tm) software, which features keyword
searching and hypertext linking.

These files are available on the Internet, in a compressed
format.  See the NCHS web site on classification of disease for
information, uniform resource locator (URL):

http://www.cdc.gov/nchswww/about/otheract/icd9/icd9hp2.htm

This NCHS web site also has a Conversion Table for 1986-98 in
Adobe Acrobat (tm) PDF format.  For downloading of other files
listed below, this site has links to the following FTP site, URL: 

ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/Health_Statistics/NCHS/Publications/ICD9-CM

The most recent 1998 files will be in a subdirectory of this site
labelled 1998.  The 1997 files will be in a subdirectory labelled
1997. 

Separate files for the preface, and the official ICD-9-CM
Guidelines are in RTF files.  The other files included in this
distribution have been compressed using Info-Zip's WiZ utility,
version 4.0.0 (for Windows 95), which is compatible with PKZIP
and PKUNZIP programs.  The utility WiZ and similar zip and unzip
utilities for different operating systems are freely available
from the following site, which also has links to other sites
related to compression software, URL:  

http://www.cdrom.com/pub/infozip/Info-Zip.html

When extracted, the file names and sizes should be as given in
the following table.  


Filename      Size in  Expanded      Expanded   Description
              bytes    Files         File
                                     Sizes
------------  -------  ------------  ---------  ----------------
APPENDXS.ZIP   76,670  app_a.rtf        57,433  Appendix A, 
                                                Morphology of 
                                                Neoplasms
                       app_b.rtf       289,578  Appendix B,
                                                Glossary of
                                                Mental Disorders
                       app_c.rtf        18,167  Appendix C, 
                                                Classification 
                                                of Drugs
                       app_d.rtf        12,885  Appendix D, 
                                                Classification 
                                                of Industrial 
                                                Accidents
                       app_e.rtf        90,118  Appendix E, List
                                                of Three-Digit 
                                                Categories
DDRUGS99.ZIP   57,197  ddrugs99.rtf    505,328  Table of Drugs 
                                                and Chemicals
DINDEX99.ZIP  708,073  dindex99.rtf  3,392,655  Index to 
                                                Diseases and 
                                                External Causes
DTAB99.ZIP    362,581  dtab99.rtf    4,073,960  Tabular List of 
                                                Diseases
GUIDELIN.RTF   81,461   ---           ---        Guidelines
PINDEX99.ZIP  163,994  pindex99.rtf    781,235  Index to 
                                                Procedures
PREFACE.RTF    18,682   ---           ---       Preface
PTAB99.ZIP    104,955  ptab99.rtf    1,233,174  Tabular List of 
                                                Procedures


Questions and comments regarding the function or format of these
files should be addressed to the Data Dissemination Branch,
National Center for Health Statistics, at (301) 436-8500, or
using a web browser that supports forms, at the following NCHS
web site, URL:  

http://www.cdc.gov/nchswww/qscf/qscf.htm


Coding questions should be submitted to:

  Coding Advice
  Central Office on ICD-9-CM
  American Hospital Association
  One North Franklin
  Chicago, IL 60606

The phone number for the Central Office on ICD-9-CM is:  
312/422-3388.  The fax number is 312/422-4583.  They do not 
accept phone inquiries.

Details about how to submit questions on coding are available
from the Central Office on ICD-9-CM web site, URL:

http://www.icd-9-cm.org/codereq.htm

