             International Classification of Diseases

                     ---   9th Revision   ---

                       Clinical Modification

                               2001

                            (ICD-9-CM)

                       in Rich Text Format


Note: this document is best viewed in a fixed width font.  

The files listed below include the entire text of "The
International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical
Modification" (ICD-9-CM), Sixth Edition, issued for use beginning
October 1, 2001 for federal fiscal year 2002 (FY02).  The 
ICD-9-CM is maintained jointly by the National Center for Health
Statistics (NCHS) and the Health Care Financing Agency (HCFA).  

These files are in Rich Text Format and may be imported into most
word processors with indentation intact.  These files come from
the official version of the ICD-9-CM, which is available on
CD-ROM from the U.S. Government Printing Office, (202) 512-1800, 
order number 017-022-01510-2.  This CD-ROM includes Folio 
VIEWS (tm) software, which features keyword searching and 
hypertext linking.

These files are available on the Internet, in a compressed
format.  See the NCHS web site on classification of disease for
information, uniform resource locator (URL):

http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/icd9.htm

This NCHS web site also has a Conversion Table for 1986-2001 in
Adobe Acrobat (tm) PDF format.  For downloading of other files
listed below, this site has links to the following FTP site, URL: 

ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/Health_Statistics/NCHS/Publications/ICD9-CM

The most recent 2001 files will be in a subdirectory of this site
labeled 2001.  Earlier files will be in subdirectories identified 
by the year.  

Separate files for the preface, the official ICD-9-CM Guidelines, 
and the conversion table are in RTF files.  The other files 
included in this distribution have been compressed using 
Info-Zip's WiZ utility, version 5.0.1 (for Windows), which is 
compatible with PKZIP and PKUNZIP programs.  The utility WiZ and 
similar zip and unzip utilities for different operating systems 
are freely available from the following site, which also has links 
to other sites related to compression software, URL:  

http://www.info-zip.org/pub/infozip/

When extracted, the file names and sizes should be as given in
the following table.  Any files other than this one 
(README02.TXT) and the ones listed below, even if included in 
the same directory, will not be directly related to the ICD.  

Filename       Size in  Expanded      Expanded   Description
               bytes    Files         File
                                      Sizes
------------   -------  ------------  ---------  ----------------
APPNDX02.ZIP    88,218  Dmorph02.RTF    104,888  Appendix A, 
                                                 Morphology of 
                                                 Neoplasms
                        Dment02.RTF     257,478  Appendix B,
                                                 Glossary of
                                                 Mental Disorders
                        Ddrgcl02.RTF     26,245  Appendix C, 
                                                 Classification 
                                                 of Drugs
                        Dindst02.RTF     21,435  Appendix D, 
                                                 Classification 
                                                 of Industrial 
                                                 Accidents
                        Dc_3d02.RTF     125,085  Appendix E, List
                                                 of Three-Digit 
                                                 Categories
DDRUGS02.ZIP    57,427  Ddrugs02.RTF    441,116  Table of Drugs 
                                                 and Chemicals
DINDEX02.ZIP   801,005  Dindex02.RTF  6,780,615  Index to 
                                                 Diseases
EINDEX02.ZIP    40,661  Eindex02.RTF    396,254  Index to 
                                                 External Causes
DTAB02.ZIP     504,613  Dtab02.RTF    6,970,404  Tabular List of 
                                                 Diseases
PINDEX02.ZIP   192,667  Pindex02.RTF  1,692,118  Index to 
                                                 Procedures
PTAB02.ZIP     148,213  Ptab02.RTF    2,062,234  Tabular List of 
                                                 Procedures
CnvTb02.RTF     58,404  ---           ---        Conversion Table
Guide02.RTF    116,013  ---           ---        Guidelines
Prefac02.RTF    31,949  ---           ---        Preface

Questions and comments regarding the function or format of these 
files should be addressed to the Data Dissemination Branch, 
National Center for Health Statistics, at (301) 458-4636, or 
using a web browser that supports forms, at the following NCHS
web site, URL:  

http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/mail/mail.htm

Coding questions should be submitted to:

  Coding Advice
  Central Office on ICD-9-CM
  American Hospital Association
  One North Franklin
  Chicago, IL 60606

The phone number for the Central Office on ICD-9-CM is:  
(312) 422-3366.  The fax number is (312) 422-4583.  They do not 
accept phone inquiries.

Details about how to submit questions on coding are available
from the Central Office on ICD-9-CM web site, URL:

http://www.icd-9-cm.org/codereq.htm
