             International Classification of Diseases

                     ---   9th Revision   ---

                       Clinical Modification

                               2002

                            (ICD-9-CM)

                       in Rich Text Format


Note: this document is best viewed in a fixed width font.  

The files listed below include the entire text of "The
International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical
Modification" (ICD-9-CM), Sixth Edition, issued for use beginning
October 1, 2002 for federal fiscal year 2003 (FY03).  The 
ICD-9-CM is maintained jointly by the National Center for Health
Statistics (NCHS) and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services (CMS). 

These files are in Rich Text Format and may be imported into most
word processors with indentation intact.  These files come from
the official version of the ICD-9-CM, which is available on
CD-ROM from the U.S. Government Printing Office, (202) 512-1800, 
order number 017-022-01534-0.  This CD-ROM includes Folio 
VIEWS (tm) software, which features keyword searching and 
hypertext linking.

These files are available on the Internet, in a compressed
format.  See the NCHS web site on classification of disease for
information, uniform resource locator (URL):

http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/icd9.htm

This NCHS web site also has links to a Conversion Table for 
1986-2002, and to the Official Guidelines for ICD-9-CM, in Adobe 
Acrobat (tm) PDF format.  For downloading of other files listed 
below, this site has links to the following FTP site, URL: 

ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/Health_Statistics/NCHS/Publications/ICD9-CM

The most recent 2002 files will be in a subdirectory of this site
labeled 2002.  Earlier files will be in subdirectories identified 
by the year.  

A separate files for the preface is in an RTF file.  The other 
files included in this distribution have been compressed using 
Info-Zip's WiZ utility, version 5.0.2 (for Windows), which is 
compatible with PKZIP and PKUNZIP programs.  The utility WiZ and 
similar zip and unzip utilities for different operating systems 
are freely available from the following site, which also has links 
to other sites related to compression software, URL:  

http://www.info-zip.org/pub/infozip/

The following table lists file names and sizes when extracted for 
the ICD-9-CM files available by FTP, for use as of October 1, 
2002, for federal fiscal year 2003 (FY03).  

Filename       Size in  Expanded      Expanded   Description
               bytes    Files         File
                                      Sizes
------------   -------  ------------  ---------  ----------------
APPNDX03.ZIP    88,187  Dmorph03.RTF    104,747  Appendix A, 
                                                 Morphology of 
                                                 Neoplasms
                        Dment03.RTF     257,297  Appendix B,
                                                 Glossary of
                                                 Mental Disorders
                        Ddrgcl03.RTF     26,240  Appendix C, 
                                                 Classification 
                                                 of Drugs
                        Dindst03.RTF     21,428  Appendix D, 
                                                 Classification 
                                                 of Industrial 
                                                 Accidents
                        Dc_3d03.RTF     125,133  Appendix E, List
                                                 of Three-Digit 
                                                 Categories
DDRUGS03.ZIP    60,616  Ddrugs03.RTF    458,995  Table of Drugs 
                                                 and Chemicals
DINDEX03.ZIP   806,416  Dindex03.RTF  6,824,968  Index to 
                                                 Diseases
EINDEX03.ZIP    42,379  Eindex03.RTF    419,500  Index to 
                                                 External Causes
DTAB03.ZIP     513,715  Dtab03.RTF    7,074,156  Tabular List of 
                                                 Diseases
PINDEX03.ZIP   195,018  Pindex03.RTF  1,717,172  Index to 
                                                 Procedures
PTAB03.ZIP     159,343  Ptab03.RTF    2,317,635  Tabular List of 
                                                 Procedures
Prefac03.RTF    29,827  ---           ---        Preface

Questions and comments regarding the function or format of these 
files should be addressed to the Data Dissemination Branch, 
National Center for Health Statistics, at (301) 458-4636, or 
using a web browser that supports forms, at the following NCHS
web site, URL:  

http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/mail/mail.htm

Coding questions should be submitted to:

  Coding Advice
  Central Office on ICD-9-CM
  American Hospital Association
  One North Franklin
  Chicago, IL 60606

The phone number for the Central Office on ICD-9-CM is:  
(312) 422-3366.  The fax number is (312) 422-4583.  They do not 
accept phone inquiries.

Details about how to submit questions on coding are available
from the Central Office on ICD-9-CM web site, URL:

http://www.hospitalconnect.com/ahacentraloffice/ask.jsp
