             International Classification of Diseases

                     ---   9th Revision   ---

                       Clinical Modification

                               1997

                            (ICD-9-CM)

                       in Rich Text Format


Note: this document is best viewed in a fixed width font.  

The files listed below include the entire text of "The
International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical
Modification" (ICD-9-CM), Sixth Edition, issued for use beginning
October 1, 1997 for federal fiscal year 1998 (FY98).  The ICD-9-
CM is maintained jointly by the National Center for Health
Statistics (NCHS) and the Health Care Financing Agency (HCFA).  

These files are in Rich Text Format and may be imported into most
word processors with indentation intact.  These files come from
the official version of the ICD-9-CM, which is available on
CD-ROM from the U.S. Government Printing Office, (202) 512-1800,
order number 017-022-01392-4.  This CD-ROM includes Folio
Corporation's VIEWS (tm) software, which features keyword
searching and hypertext linking.

These files are available on the Internet, in a compressed
format.  See the NCHS web site on classification of disease for
information, uniform resource locator (URL):

http://www.cdc.gov/nchswww/about/otheract/icd9/icd9hp2.htm

This NCHS web site also has a Conversion Table for 1986-97 in
Adobe Acrobat (tm) PDF format.  For downloading of other files
listed below, this site has links to the following FTP site, URL: 

ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/Health_Statistics/NCHS/Publications/ICD9-CM

The most recent 1997 files will be in a subdirectory of this site
labelled 1997.  The 1996 files will be in a subdirectory labelled
1996. 

Separate files for the preface, and the official ICD-9-CM
Guidelines are in RTF files.  The other files included in this
distribution have been compressed using Info-Zip's WiZ utility,
version 4.0.0 (for Windows 95), which is compatible with PKZIP
and PKUNZIP programs.  The utility WiZ and similar zip and unzip
utilities for different operating systems are freely available
from the following site, which also has links to other sites
related to compression software, URL:  

http://www.cdrom.com/pub/infozip/Info-Zip.html

When extracted, the file names and sizes should be as given in
the following table.  


Filename      Size in  Expanded      Expanded   Description
              bytes    Files         File
                                     Sizes
------------  -------  ------------  ---------  ----------------
APPENDXS.ZIP  76,613   app_a.rtf     57,421     Appendix A, 
                                                Morphology of 
                                                Neoplasms
                       app_b.rtf     289,566    Appendix B,
                                                Glossary of
                                                Mental Disorders
                       app_c.rtf     18,155     Appendix C, 
                                                Classification 
                                                of Drugs
                       app_d.rtf     12,873     Appendix D, 
                                                Classification 
                                                of Industrial 
                                                Accidents
                       app_e.rtf     90,106     Appendix E, List
                                                of Three-Digit 
                                                Categories
DDRUGS98.ZIP  54,472   ddrugs98.rtf  415,010    Table of Drugs 
                                                and Chemicals
DINDEX98.ZIP  768,932  dindex98.rtf  4,763,362  Index to 
                                                Diseases and 
                                                External Causes
DTAB98.ZIP    360,619  dtab98.rtf    4,076,054  Tabular List of 
                                                Diseases
GUIDE98.RTF   81,449   ---           ---        Guidelines
PINDEX98.ZIP  164,435  pindex98.rtf  808,014    Index to 
                                                Procedures
PREFACE.RTF   18,670   ---           ---        Preface
PTAB98.ZIP    103,816  ptab98.rtf    1,258,552  Tabular List of 
                                                Procedures


Questions and comments regarding the function or format of these
files should be addressed to the Data Dissemination Branch,
National Center for Health Statistics, at (301) 436-8500, or
using a web browser that supports forms, at the following NCHS
web site, URL:  

http://www.cdc.gov/nchswww/qscf/qscf.htm


Coding questions should be submitted to:

  Coding Advice
  Central Office on ICD-9-CM
  American Hospital Association
  One North Franklin
  Chicago, IL 60606

The phone number for the Central Office on ICD-9-CM is:  
312/422-3388.  The fax number is 312/422-4583.  They do not 
accept phone inquiries.

Details about how to submit questions on coding are available
from the Central Office on ICD-9-CM web site, URL:

http://www.icd-9-cm.org/codereq.htm
