{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff1\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f32\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f33\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f35\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f36\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}
{\f37\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f38\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f39\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f40\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f41\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}
{\f43\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}{\f44\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f45\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f46\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f47\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;
\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\sb180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 
\snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\ql \li0\ri0\sb180\sa180\nowidctlpar\brdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brsp40\brdrcf16 \brdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brsp40\brdrcf16 \faauto\rin0\lin0\rtlgutter\itap0 \shading10000\cfpat16 
\b\f1\fs24\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext15 H1;}{\s16\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\sb180\sa180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext16 H2;}{
\s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext17 H3;}{\s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 
\f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext18 H4;}{\s19\ql \li720\ri0\sa180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext19 P2;}{
\s20\ql \li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext20 P2+;}{\s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 
\snext21 P3;}{\s22\ql \li1800\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1800\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext22 P3+;}{\s23\ql \fi-720\li2880\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2880\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext23 P3S;}{\s24\ql \li2160\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext24 P4;}{
\s25\ql \li2520\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2520\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext25 P4+;}{\s26\ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx503\tx720\tqdec\tlhyph\tx7013\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \snext26 Table of Contents;}}{\info{\title Official Guidelines for Coding and Reporting (FY01)}{\author zhc2}{\doccomm Coding Guidelines (Oct. 1, 2000)}{\operator zhc2}
{\creatim\yr2000\mo8\dy11\hr14\min41}{\revtim\yr2000\mo8\dy11\hr14\min41}{\version2}{\edmins1}{\nofpages25}{\nofwords9747}{\nofchars55559}{\*\company National Center for Health Statistics}{\nofcharsws68230}{\vern8247}}
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\horzdoc\dghspace120\dgvspace120\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984\dghshow0\dgvshow3\jcompress\viewkind1\viewscale100\nolnhtadjtbl \fet0\sectd \linex0\sectdefaultcl 
{\header \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sb180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {ICD-9-CM Coding Guidelines (FY01)
\par }}{\footer \pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\sb180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\cf0 \chpgn }{
\par }}{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}
{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8
\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s15\qc \li0\ri0\sb180\sa180\nowidctlpar\brdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brsp40\brdrcf16 \brdrb
\brdrs\brdrw20\brsp40\brdrcf16 \faauto\rin0\lin0\rtlgutter\itap0 \shading10000\cfpat16 \b\f1\fs24\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20 {\*\bkmkstart Intro}{\*\bkmkend Intro}OFFICIAL ICD-9-CM GUIDELINES FOR CODING AND REPORTING

\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {
The Public Health Service and the Health Care Financing Administration of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services present the following guidelines for coding and reporting using the International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical
 Modification (ICD-9-CM).  These guidelines should be used as a companion document to the official versions of the ICD-9-CM.
\par These guidelines for coding and reporting have been developed and approved by the cooperating parties for ICD-9-CM:  American Hospit
al Association, American Health Information Management Association, Health Care Financing Administration and the National Center for Health Statistics.  These guidelines previously appeared in the Coding Clinic for ICD-9-CM, published by the American Hosp
ital Association.
\par These guidelines have been developed to assist the user in coding and reporting in situations where the ICD-9-CM manual does not provide direction.  Coding and sequencing instructions in the three ICD-9-CM manuals take precedence over any guidelines.

\par These guidelines are not exhaustive.  The cooperating parties are continuing to conduct review of these guidelines and develop new guidelines as needed.  Users of the ICD-9-CM should be aware that only guidelines approved by the cooperating par
ties are official.  Revision of these guidelines and new guidelines will be published by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services when they are approved by the cooperating parties.
\par }\pard\plain \s15\qc \li0\ri0\sb180\sa180\nowidctlpar\brdrt\brdrs\brdrw20\brsp40\brdrcf16 \brdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brsp40\brdrcf16 \faauto\rin0\lin0\rtlgutter\itap0 \shading10000\cfpat16 \b\f1\fs24\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20 
OFFICIAL GUIDELINES FOR CODING AND REPORTING
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\sb180\sa180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {TABLE OF CONTENTS
\par }\pard\plain \s26\ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx503\tx720\tqdec\tlhyph\tx7013\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Adverse Effects and Poisoning\tab 9
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Adverse Effect\tab 9.1
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Poisoning\tab 9.2
\par Diagnostic Coding and Reporting Guidelines for Outpatient Services \line \tab (Hospital-Based and Physician Office)\tab 12
\par External Causes of Diseases and Injuries\tab 11
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Child and Adult Abuse\tab 11.5
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 General Coding guidelines\tab 11.1
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Late effects\tab 11.8
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Misadventures and complications of care\tab 11.9
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Multiple external causes\tab 11.4
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Place of occurrence\tab 11.2
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Poisonings and adverse effects of drugs\tab 11.3
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Undetermined cause\tab 11.7
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Unknown intent\tab 11.6
\par General Inpatient Coding Guidelines\tab 1
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Acute and Chronic Conditions\tab 1.4; 2.3
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Combination Code\tab 1.5
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Impending or Threatened Condition\tab 1.9
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Late Effect\tab 1.7
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Level of Specificity in Coding\tab 1.2
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Multiple Coding of Diagnoses\tab 1.6
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Other and Unspecified (NOS) Code Titles\tab 1.3
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Uncertain Diagnosis\tab 1.8
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Use of Alphabetic Index and Tabular List\tab 1.1
\par Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) Infections\tab 10
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Asymptomatic HIV Infection\tab 10.6
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Confirmed Cases of HIV Infection/Illness\tab 10.1
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 HIV Infection in Pregnancy, Childbirth and the Puerperium\tab 10.5
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Inconclusive Lab Test for HIV\tab 10.7
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Previously Diagnoses HIV-related Illness\tab 10.3
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Selection of HIV Code\tab 10.2
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Sequencing\tab 10.4
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Testing for HIV \tab 10.8
\par Hypertension\tab 4
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Controlled Hypertension\tab 4.9
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Elevated Blood Pressure\tab 4.11
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Essential Hypertension\tab 4.1
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Hypertension with Heart Disease\tab 4.2
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Hypertensive Cardiovascular Disease\tab 4.5
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Hypertensive Heart and Renal Disease\tab 4.4
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Hypertensive Renal Disease with Chronic Renal Failure\tab 4.3
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Hypertensive Retinopathy\tab 4.6
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Secondary Hypertension\tab 4.7
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Transient Hypertension\tab 4.8
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Uncontrolled Hypertension\tab 4.10
\par Newborn Coding\tab 6
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Category V29\tab 6.3
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Congenital Anomalies\tab 6.5
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Maternal Causes of Perinatal Morbidity\tab 6.4
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Newborn Transfers\tab 6.2
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Other (Additional) Diagnoses\tab 6.6
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Prematurity and Fetal Growth Retardation\tab 6.7
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Use of Codes V30-V39\tab 6.1
\par Obstetrics\tab 5
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 General Rules\tab 5.1
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Selection of Principal Diagnosis\tab 5.2
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Chapter 11 Fifth-digits\tab 5.3
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Fetal Conditions Affecting Managment of Mother\tab 5.4
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Normal Delivery 650\tab 5.5
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Procedure Codes\tab 5.6
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Postpartum Period\tab 5.7
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Abortions\tab 5.8
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Late Effects of Complications of Pregnancy, Childbirth and\line \tab \tab  the Puerperium\tab 5.9
\par Reporting Other (Additional) Diagnoses\tab 3
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Abnormal Findings\tab 3.5
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Conditions Integral to a Disease Process\tab 3.3
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Conditions Not Integral to a Disease Process\tab 3.4
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Diagnoses Not Listed in Final Diagnostic Statement\tab 3.2
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Previous Conditions\tab 3.1
\par Selection of Principal Diagnosis\tab 2
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Acute and Chronic Conditions\tab 2.3; 1.4
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Codes from V71.0-V71.9, Observation and Evaluation \line \tab \tab for Suspected Conditions, not found\tab 2.8
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Complications of Pregnancy\tab 2.16
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Complications of Surgery and Other Medical Care\tab 2.15
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Codes in Brackets in the Alphabetic Index\tab 2.2
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Multiple Burns\tab 2.11; 8.3
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Multiple Injuries\tab 2.12
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Neoplasms\tab 2.13
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Original Treatment Plan Not Carried Out\tab 2.9
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Poisoning\tab 2.14
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Residual Condition or Nature of Late Effect\tab 2.10
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Symptoms, Signs, and Ill-defined Conditions\tab 2.1
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Symptom Followed by Contrasting/Comparative Diagnoses\tab 2.7
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Two or More Interrelated Conditions\tab 2.4
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Two or More Equally Meet Definition\tab 2.5
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Two or More Comparative or Contrasting Conditions\tab 2.6
\par Septicemia and Shock\tab 7
\par Trauma  \tab 8
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Current Burns and Encounters for Late Effects of Burns\tab 8.3
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Debridement of Wound, Infection or Burn\tab 8.4
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Multiple Fractures\tab 8.2
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Multiple Injuries\tab 8.1\line 
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\sb180\sa180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM1}{\*\bkmkend BM1}1.\tab GENERAL INPATIENT CODING GUIDELINES
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM1_1}{\*\bkmkend BM1_1}1.1\tab Use of Both Alphabetic Index and Tabular List
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab 
Use both the Alphabetic Index and the Tabular List when locating and assigning a code.  Reliance on only the Alphabetic Index or the Tabular List leads to errors in code assignments and less specificity in code selection.
\par B.\tab Locate each term in the Alphabetic Index and verify the code selected in the Tabular List.  Read and be guided by instructional notations that appear in both the Alphabetic Index and the Tabular List.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM1_2}{\*\bkmkend BM1_2}1.2\tab Level of Specificity in Coding
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Diagnostic and procedure codes are to be used at their highest level of specificity:
\par Assign three-digit codes only if there are no  four-digit codes within that code category.
\par Assign four-digit codes only if there is no fifth-digit subclassification for that category.
\par Assign the fifth-digit subclassification code for those categories where it exists.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM1_3}{\*\bkmkend BM1_3}1.3\tab Other (NEC) and Unspecified (NOS) Code Titles
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Codes labeled "other specified" (NEC\'a1not elsewhere classified) or "unspecified" (NOS\'a1
not otherwise specified) are used only when neither the diagnostic statement nor a thorough review of the medical record provides adequate information to permit assignment of a more specific code.
\par Use the code assignment for "other" or NEC when the information at hand specifies a condition but no separate code for that condition is provided.
\par Use "unspecified" (NOS) when the information at hand does not permit either a more specific or "other" code assignment.
\par When the Alphabetic Index assigns a code t
o a category labeled "other (NEC)" or to a category labeled "unspecified (NOS)", refer to the Tabular List and review the titles and inclusion terms in the subdivisions under that particular three-digit category (or subdivision under the four-digit code) 
to determine if the information at hand can be appropriately assigned to a more specific code.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM1_4}{\*\bkmkend BM1_4}1.4\tab Acute and Chronic Conditions
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
If the same condition is described as both acute (subacute) and chronic and separate subentries exist in the Alphabetic Index at the same indentation level, code both and sequence the acute (subacute) code first.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM1_5}{\*\bkmkend BM1_5}1.5\tab Combination Code
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
A single code used to classify two diagnoses or a diagnosis with an associated secondary process (manifestation) or an associated complication is called a combination code.  Combination codes are identified by referring to subterm entries in the Alphabeti
c Index and by reading the inclusion and exclusion notes in the Tabular List.
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab 
Assign only the combination code when  that code fully identifies the diagnostic conditions involved or when the Alphabetic Index so directs.  Multiple coding should not be use
d when the classification provides a combination code that clearly identifies all of the elements documented in the diagnosis.  When the combination code lacks necessary specificity in describing the manifestation or complication, an additional code may b
e used as a secondary code.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM1_6}{\*\bkmkend BM1_6}1.6\tab Multiple Coding of Diagnoses
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Multiple coding is required for certain conditions not subject to the rules for combination codes.
\par Instruction for conditions that require multiple coding appear in the Alphabetic Index and the Tabular List.
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab 
Alphabetic Index:  Codes for both etiology and manifestation of a disease appear following the subentry term, with the second code in brackets.  Assign both codes in the same sequence in which they appear in the Alphabetic Index.
\par B.\tab Tabular List:  Instructional terms, such as "Code first...," "Use additional code for any...," and "Note...," indicate when to use more than one code.
\par }\pard\plain \s24\ql \li2160\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 "Code first underlying disease" - Assign the codes for both the manifestation and underlying cause.  The co
des for manifestations cannot be used (designated) as principal diagnosis.
\par "Use additional code, to identify manifestation, as ..." - Assign also the code that identifies the manifestation, such as, but not limited to, the examples listed.  The codes for manifestations  cannot be used (designated) as principal diagnosis.
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {C.\tab 
Apply multiple coding instructions throughout the classification where appropriate, whether or not multiple coding directions appear in the Alphabetic Index or the Tabular List.  Avoid i
ndiscriminate multiple coding or irrelevant information, such as symptoms or signs characteristic of the diagnosis.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM1_7}{\*\bkmkend BM1_7}1.7\tab Late Effect
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
A late effect is the residual effect (condition produced) after the acute phase of an illness or injury has terminated
. There is no time limit on when a late effect code can be used.  The residual may be apparent early, such as in cerebrovascular accident cases, or it may occur months or years later, such as that due to a previous injury.
\par Coding of late effects requires two codes:
\par }\pard\plain \s23\ql \fi-720\li2880\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2880\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 The residual condition or nature of the late effect
\par The cause of the late effect
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
The residual condition or nature of the late effect is sequenced first, followed by the cause of the late effect, except in those few instances where the code for la
te effect is followed by a manifestation code identified in the Tabular List and title or the late effect code has been expanded (at the fourth and fifth-digit levels) to include the manifestation(s).
\par The code for the acute phase of an illness or injury that led to the late effect is never used with a code for the cause of the late effect.
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab Late Effects of Cerebrovascular Disease
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
Category 438 is used to indicate conditions classifiable to categories 430-437 as the causes of late effects (neurologic defici
ts), themselves  classified elsewhere.  These "late effects" include neurologic deficits that persist after initial onset of conditions classifiable to 430-437. The neurologic deficits caused by cerebrovascular disease may be present from the onset or may
 arise at any time after the onset of the condition classifiable to 430-437.
\par Codes from category 438 may be assigned on a health care record with codes from 430-437, if the patient has a current CVA and deficits from an old CVA.
\par Assign code V12.59 (and not a code from category 438) as an additional code for history of cerebrovascular disease when no neurologic deficits are present.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM1_8}{\*\bkmkend BM1_8}1.8\tab Uncertain Diagnosis
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 If the diagnosis documented at the time of discharge is qualified as "probable", "suspected", "lik
ely", "questionable", "possible", or "still to be ruled out", code the condition as if it existed or was established.  The bases for this guidelines are the diagnostic workup, arrangements for further workup or observation, and initial therapeutic approac
h that correspond most closely with the established diagnosis.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM1_9}{\*\bkmkend BM1_9}1.9\tab Impending or Threatened Condition
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Code any condition described at the time of discharge as "impending" or "threatened" as follows:
\par If it did occur, code as confirmed diagnosis.
\par If it did not occur, reference the Alphabetic Index to determine if the condition has a subentry term for "impending" or "threatened" and also reference main term entries for Impending and for Threatened.
\par }\pard\plain \s24\ql \li2160\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 If the subterms are listed, assign the given code.
\par If the subterms are not listed, code the existing forerunner condition(s) and not the condition described as impending or threatened.
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\sb180\sa180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM2}{\*\bkmkend BM2}2.\tab SELECTION OF PRINCIPAL DIAGNOSIS
\par }\pard\plain \s19\ql \li720\ri0\sa180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 The circumstances of inpatient admission always govern the selection of principal di
agnosis.  The principal diagnosis is defined in the Uniform Hospital Discharge Data Set (UHDDS) as "that condition established after study to be chiefly responsible for occasioning the admission of the patient to the hospital for care".
\par In determining principal diagnosis the coding directives in the ICD-9-CM manuals, Volumes I, II, and III, take precedence over all other guidelines.
\par The importance of consistent, complete documentation in the medical record cannot be overemphasized.  Without such documentation the application of all coding guidelines is a difficult, if not impossible, task.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM2_1}{\*\bkmkend BM2_1}2.1\tab Codes for symptoms, signs, and ill-defined conditions.

\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Codes for symptoms, signs, and ill-defined conditions from Chapter 16 are not to be used as principal diag
nosis when a related definitive diagnosis has been established. 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM2_2}{\*\bkmkend BM2_2}2.2\tab Codes in brackets.
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
Codes in brackets in the Alphabetic Index can never be sequenced as principal diagnosis.  Coding directives require that the codes in brackets be sequenced in the order as they appear  in the Alphabetic Index.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM2_3}{\*\bkmkend BM2_3}2.3\tab Acute and chronic conditions.
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
If the same condition is described as both acute (subacute) and chronic and separate subentries exist in the Alphabetic Index at the same indentation level, code both and sequence the acute (subacute) code first.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM2_4}{\*\bkmkend BM2_4}2.4\tab 
Two or more interrelated conditions, each potentially meeting the definition for principal diagnosis.
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 When there are two or more interrelated conditions (such as diseases in the same ICD-9-CM chapter o
r manifestations characteristically associated with a certain disease) potentially meeting the definition of principal diagnosis, either condition may be sequenced first, unless the circumstances of the admission, the therapy provided, the Tabular List, o
r the Alphabetic Index indicate otherwise.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM2_5}{\*\bkmkend BM2_5}2.5\tab 
Two or more diagnoses that equally meet the definition for principal diagnosis.
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
In the unusual instance when two or more diagnoses equally meet the criteria for principal diagnosis as determined by the ci
rcumstances of admission, diagnostic workup and/or therapy provided, and the Alphabetic Index, Tabular List, or another coding guidelines does not provide sequencing direction, any one of the diagnoses may be sequenced first.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM2_6}{\*\bkmkend BM2_6}2.6\tab Two or more comparative or contrasting conditions.

\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
In those rare instances when two or more contrasting or comparative diagnoses are documented as "either/or" (or similar terminology), they are coded as if the diagnoses were confirmed and the diagnoses are sequenced according
 to the circumstances of the admission.  If no further determination can be made as to which diagnosis should be principal, either diagnosis may be sequenced first.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM2_7}{\*\bkmkend BM2_7}2.7\tab 
A symptom(s) followed by contrasting/comparative diagnoses.
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 When a symptom(s) is 
followed by contrasting/comparative diagnoses, the symptom code is sequenced first.  All the contrasting/comparative diagnoses should be coded as suspected conditions.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM2_8}{\*\bkmkend BM2_8}2.8\tab 
Codes from the V71.0-V71.9 series, Observation and evaluation for suspected conditions.
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
Codes from the V71.0-V71.9 series are assigned as principal diagnoses for encounters or admissions to evaluate the patient's condition when there is some evidence to suggest the existence of an abnormal condition or following an accident or other
 incident that ordinarily results in a health problem, and where no supporting evidence for the suspected condition is found and no treatment is currently required.  The fact that the patient may be scheduled for continuing observation in the office/clini
c setting following discharge does not limit the use of this category.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM2_9}{\*\bkmkend BM2_9}2.9\tab Original treatment plan not carried out.
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
Sequence as the principal diagnosis the condition which after study occasioned the admission to the hospital, even though treatment may not have been carried out due to unforeseen circumstances.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM2_10}{\*\bkmkend BM2_10}2.10\tab Residual condition or nature of late effect.
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
The residual condition or nature of the late effect is sequenced first, followed by the late effect code for the cause of the residual condition, except in a few instances where the Alphabetic Index or Tabular List directs otherwise.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM2_11}{\*\bkmkend BM2_11}2.11\tab Multiple burns.
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
Sequence first the code that reflects the highest degree of burn when more than one burn is present.  (See also Burns guideline 8.3)
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM2_12}{\*\bkmkend BM2_12}2.12\tab Multiple injuries.
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
When multiple injuries exist, the code for the most severe injury as determined by the attending physician is sequenced first.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM2_13}{\*\bkmkend BM2_13}2.13\tab Neoplasms.
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab 
If the treatment is directed at the malignancy, designate the malignancy as the principal diagnosis, except when the purpose of the encounter or hospital admission is for radiotherapy session(s), V58.0, or for chemotherapy session(s), V58.1, in which inst
ance the malignancy is coded and sequenced second.
\par B.\tab When a patient is admitted for the purpose of radiotherapy or chemotherapy and develops complications such as uncontrolled nausea and vomiting or dehydration, the principal diagnosis is Encounter for rad
iotherapy, V58.0, or Encounter for chemotherapy, V58.1.
\par C.\tab When an episode of inpatient care involves surgical removal of a primary site or secondary site malignancy followed by adjunct chemotherapy or radiotherapy, code the malignancy as the principal dia
gnosis, using codes in the 140-198 series or where appropriate in the 200-203 series.
\par D.\tab When the reason for admission is to determine the extent of the malignancy, or for a procedure such as paracentesis or thoracentesis, the primary malignancy or appropr
iate metastatic site is designated as the principal diagnosis, even though chemotherapy or radiotherapy is administered.
\par E.\tab When the primary malignancy has been previously excised or eradicated from its site and there is not adjunct treatment directed to t
hat site and no evidence of any remaining malignancy at the primary site, use the appropriate code from the V10 series to indicate the former site of primary malignancy.  Any mention of extension, invasion, or metastasis to a nearby structure or organ or 
to a distant site is coded as a secondary malignant  neoplasm to that site and may be the principal diagnosis in the absence of the primary site.
\par F.\tab When a patient is admitted because of a primary neoplasm with metastasis and treatment is directed toward the secondary site only, the secondary neoplasm is designated as the principal diagnosis even though the primary malignancy is still present.

\par G.\tab Symptoms, signs, and ill-defined conditions listed in Chapter 16 characteristic of, or associated with, an existi
ng primary or secondary site malignancy cannot be used to replace the malignancy as principal diagnosis, regardless of the number of admissions or encounters for treatment and care of the neoplasm.
\par H.\tab Coding and sequencing of complications associated with the malignant neoplasm or with the therapy thereof are subject to the following guidelines:
\par }\pard\plain \s24\ql \li2160\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
When admission is for management of an anemia associated with the malignancy, and the treatment is only for anemia, the anemia is designated at the principal diagnosis and is followed by the appropriate code(s) for the malignancy.
\par When the admission is for management of an anemia associated with chemotherapy or radiotherapy and the only treatment is for the anemia, the anemia is designated as the principal diagnosis followed by the appropriate code(s) for the malignancy.
\par When the admission is for management of dehydration due to the malignancy or the therapy, or a combination of both, and only the dehydration is being treated (intravenous rehydration), the dehydration
 is designated as the principal diagnosis, followed by the code(s) for the malignancy.
\par When the admission is for treatment of a complication resulting from a surgical procedure performed for the treatment of an intestinal malignancy, designate the complica
tion as the principal diagnosis if treatment is directed at resolving the complication.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM2_14}{\*\bkmkend BM2_14}2.14\tab Poisoning
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
When coding a poisoning or reaction to the improper use of a medication (e.g., wrong dose, wrong substance, wrong route of administration) the po
isoning code is sequenced first, followed by a code for the manifestation.  If there is also a diagnosis of drug abuse or dependence to the substance, the abuse or dependence is coded as an additional code.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM2_15}{\*\bkmkend BM2_15}2.15\tab Complications of surgery and other medical care.

\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
When the admission is for treatment of a complication resulting from surgery or other medical care, the complication code is sequenced as the principal diagnosis.  If the complication is classified to the 996-999 series, an additional code for
 the specific complication may be assigned.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM2_16}{\*\bkmkend BM2_16}2.16\tab Complication of pregnancy.
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
When a patient is admitted because of a condition that is either a complication pregnancy or that is complicating the pregnancy, the code for the obstetric complication is 
the principal diagnosis.  An additional code may be assigned as needed to provide specificity.
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\sb180\sa180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM3}{\*\bkmkend BM3}3.\tab REPORTING OTHER (ADDITIONAL) DIAGNOSES
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A joint effort between the attending physician and coder is essential to achieve complete and accurate documentation,
 code assignment, and reporting of diagnoses and procedures.
\par These guidelines have been developed and approved by the Cooperating Parties to assure both the physician and the coder in identifying those diagnoses that are to be reported in addition to the p
rincipal diagnosis.  Hospitals may record other diagnoses as needed for internal data use.
\par The UHDDS definitions are used by acute care short-term hospitals to report inpatient data elements in a standardized manner.  These data elements and their definitions can be found in the July 31, 1985, Federal Register (Vol. 50, No, 147), pp. 31038-40.

\par The UHDDS item #11-b defines Other Diagnoses as "all conditions that coexist at the time of admission, that develop subsequently, or that affect the treatment receive
d and/or the length of stay.  Diagnoses that relate to an earlier episode which have no bearing on the current hospital stay are to be excluded".
\par GENERAL RULE
\par For reporting purposes the definition for "other diagnoses" is interpreted as additional conditions that affect patient care in terms of requiring:\line 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\ql \li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 clinical evaluation; or
\par therapeutic treatment; or
\par diagnostic procedures; or
\par extended length of hospital stay; or
\par increased nursing care and/or monitoring.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {
The following guidelines are to be applied in designating "other diagnoses" when neither the Alphabetic Index nor the Tabular List in ICD-9-CM provide direction.
\par The listing of the diagnoses on the attestation statement is the responsibility of the attending physician.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM3_1}{\*\bkmkend BM3_1}3.1\tab Previous conditions.
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
If the physician has included a diagnosis in the final diagnostic statement, such as the discharge summary or the face sheet, it should ordinarily be coded.  Some physicians include in the diagnostic statement r
esolved conditions or diagnoses and status-post procedures from previous admission that have no bearing on the current stay.  Such conditions are not to be reported and are coded only if required by hospital policy.
\par However, history codes (V10-V19) may be used as secondary codes if the historical condition or family history has an impact on current care or influences treatment.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM3_2}{\*\bkmkend BM3_2}3.2\tab Diagnoses not listed in the final diagnostic statement.

\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 When the physician has documented what appears to be a current di
agnosis in the body of the record, but has not included the diagnosis in the final diagnostic statement, the physician should be asked whether the diagnosis should be added.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM3_3}{\*\bkmkend BM3_3}3.3\tab 
Conditions that are an integral part of a disease process.
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Conditions that are integral to the disease process should not be assigned as additional codes.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM3_4}{\*\bkmkend BM3_4}3.4\tab 
Conditions that are not an integral part of a disease process.
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Additional conditions that may not be associated routinely with a disease process should be coded when present.

\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM3_5}{\*\bkmkend BM3_5}3.5\tab Abnormal findings.
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
Abnormal findings (laboratory, x-ray, pathologic, and other diagnostic results) are not coded and reported unless the physician indicates their clinical significance.  If the findings are outside the normal range an
d the physician has ordered other tests to evaluate the condition or prescribed treatment, it is appropriate to ask the physician whether the diagnosis should be added.
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\sb180\sa180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM4}{\*\bkmkend BM4}4.\tab HYPERTENSION
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM4_1}{\*\bkmkend BM4_1}4.1\tab Hypertension, Essential, or NOS
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
Assign hypertension (arterial) (essential) (primary) (systemic) (NOS) to category code 401 with the appropriate fourth digit to indicate malignant (.0), benign (.1), or unspecified (.9).  Do not use either .0 malignant or .1 benign unless medical record d
ocumentation supports such a designation.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM4_2}{\*\bkmkend BM4_2}4.2\tab Hypertension with Heart Disease
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
Certain heart conditions (425.8, 428, 429.0-429.3, 429.8, 429.9) are assigned to a code from category 402 when a causal relationship is stated (due to hypertension) or implied (hypertensive).  Use only the code from category 402.
\par The same heart conditions (425.8, 428, 429.0-429.3, 429.8, 429.9) with hypertension, but without a stated casual relationship, are coded separately.  Sequence according to the circumstances of the admission.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM4_3}{\*\bkmkend BM4_3}4.3\tab Hypertensive Renal Disease with Chronic Renal Failure

\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
Assign codes from category 403, Hypertensive renal disease, when conditions classified to categories 585-587 are present.  Unlike hypertension with heart disease, ICD-9-CM presumes a 
cause-and-effect relationship and classifies renal failure with hypertension as hypertensive renal disease.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM4_4}{\*\bkmkend BM4_4}4.4\tab Hypertensive Heart and Renal Disease
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Assign codes from combination category 404, Hypertensive heart and renal disease, when both hypertens
ive renal disease and hypertensive heart disease are stated in the diagnosis.  Assume a relationship between the hypertension and the renal disease, whether or not the condition is so designated.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM4_5}{\*\bkmkend BM4_5}4.5\tab Hypertensive Cerebrovascular Disease.
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
First assign codes from 430-438, Cerebrovascular disease, then the appropriate hypertension code from categories 401-405. 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM4_6}{\*\bkmkend BM4_6}4.6\tab Hypertensive Retinopathy
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Two codes are necessary to identify the condition.  First assign the code from subcategory 362.11,
 Hypertensive retinopathy, then the appropriate code from categories 401-405 to indicate the type of hypertension.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM4_7}{\*\bkmkend BM4_7}4.7\tab Hypertension, Secondary
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Two codes are required: one to identify the underlying condition and one from category 405 to identify the 
hypertension.  Sequencing of codes is determined by the reason for admission to the hospital.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM4_8}{\*\bkmkend BM4_8}4.8\tab Hypertension, Transient
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
Assign code 796.2, Elevated blood pressure reading without diagnosis of hypertension, unless patient has an established diagnosis of hypertension.  Assign code 642.3x for transient hypertension of pregnancy.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM4_9}{\*\bkmkend BM4_9}4.9\tab Hypertension, Controlled
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
Assign appropriate code from categories 401-405.  This diagnostic statement usually refers to an existing state of hypertension under control by therapy.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM4_10}{\*\bkmkend BM4_10}4.10\tab Hypertension, Uncontrolled
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
Uncontrolled hypertension may refer to untreated hypertension or hypertension not responding to current therapeutic regimen.  In either case. assign the appropriate code from categories 401-405 to design
ate the stage and type of hypertension.  Code to the type of hypertension.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM4_11}{\*\bkmkend BM4_11}4.11\tab Elevated Blood Pressure
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
For a statement of elevated blood pressure without further specificity, assign code 796.2, Elevated blood pressure reading without diagnosis of hypertension, rather than a code from category 401.
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\sb180\sa180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM5}{\*\bkmkend BM5}5.\tab OBSTETRICS
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {Introduction
\par These guidelines have been developed and approved by the Cooperating Parties in conjunction with the Editorial Advisory Board of Coding Clinic and the American College of Obst
etricians and Gynecologists, to assist the coder in coding and reporting obstetric cases.  Where feasible, previously published advice has been incorporated.  Some advice in these new guidelines may supersede previous advice.  The guidelines are provided 
for reporting purposes.  Health care facilities may record additional diagnoses as needed for internal data needs.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM5_1}{\*\bkmkend BM5_1}5.1\tab General Rules
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab 
Obstetric cases require codes from chapter 11, codes in the range 630-677, Complications of Pregnancy, Childbirth, 
and the Puerperium.  Should the physician document that the pregnancy is incidental to the encounter than code V22.2 should be used in place of any chapter 11 codes.  It is the physician's responsibility to state that the condition being treated is not af
fecting the pregnancy.
\par B.\tab Chapter 11 codes have sequencing priority over codes from other chapters.  Additional codes from other chapters may be used in conjunction with chapter 11 codes to further specify conditions.
\par C.\tab Chapter 11 codes are to be used only on the maternal record, never on the record of the newborn.
\par D.\tab An outcome of delivery code, V27.0-V27.9, should be included on every maternal record when a delivery has occurred.  These codes are not to be used on subsequent records or on the newborn record.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM5_2}{\*\bkmkend BM5_2}5.2\tab Selection of Principal Diagnosis
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab The circumstances of the encounter govern the selection of the principal diagnosis.  
\par B.\tab In episodes when no delivery occurs the principal diagnosis should correspond to the principal complication of the pr
egnancy which necessitated the encounter.  Should more than one complication exist, all of which are treated or monitored, any of the complications codes may be sequenced first.
\par C.\tab When a delivery occurs the principal diagnosis should correspond to the mai
n circumstances or complication of the delivery.  In cases of cesarean deliveries, the principal diagnosis should correspond to the reason the cesarean was performed, unless the reason for admission was unrelated to the condition resulting in the cesarean
 delivery.
\par D.\tab For routine prenatal visits when no complications are present codes V22.0, Supervision of normal first pregnancy, and V22.1, Supervision of other normal pregnancy, should be used as principal diagnoses.  These codes should not be used in conju
nction with chapter 11 codes.
\par E.\tab For prenatal outpatient visits for patients with high-risk pregnancies, a code from category V23, Supervision of high-risk pregnancy, should be used as the principal diagnosis.  Secondary chapter 11 codes may be used in con
junction with these codes if appropriate.  A thorough review of any pertinent excludes note is necessary to be certain that these V codes are being used properly.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM5_3}{\*\bkmkend BM5_3}5.3\tab Chapter 11 Fifth-digits
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab 
Categories 640-648, 651-676 have required fifth-digits which indicate whether the encounter is antepartum, postpartum and whether a delivery has also occurred. 
\par B.\tab The fifth-digits which are appropriate for each code number are listed in brackets under eac
h code.  The fifth-digits on each code should all be consistent with each other.  That is, should a delivery occur all of the fifth-digits should indicate the delivery.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM5_4}{\*\bkmkend BM5_4}5.4\tab Fetal Conditions Affecting the Management of the Mother.

\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Codes from category 
655, Known or suspected fetal abnormality affecting management of the mother, and category 656, Other fetal and placental problems affecting the management of the mother, are assigned only when the fetal condition is actually responsible for modifying the
 management of the mother, i.e., by requiring diagnostic studies, additional observation, special care, or termination of pregnancy.  The fact that the fetal condition exists does not justify assigning a code from this series to the mother's record.

\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM5_5}{\*\bkmkend BM5_5}5.5\tab Normal Delivery, 650
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab 
Code 650 is for use in cases when a woman is admitted for a full-term normal delivery and delivers a single, healthy infant without any complications antepartum, during the delivery, or postpartum during the delivery episode.
\par B.\tab 650 may be used if the patient had a complications at some point during her pregnancy but the complication is not present at the time of the admission for delivery.
\par C.\tab Code 650 is always a principal diagnosis.  It is not to be used if any other code from c
hapter 11 is needed to describe a current complication of the antenatal, delivery, or perinatal period.  Additional codes from other chapters may be used with code 650 if they are not related to or are in any way complicating the pregnancy. 
\par D.\tab V27.0, Single liveborn, is the only outcome of delivery code appropriate for use with 650.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM5_6}{\*\bkmkend BM5_6}5.6\tab Procedure Codes
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab 
In cases of cesarean delivery, the selection of the principal diagnosis should correspond to the reason the cesarean delivery was performed unless the reason for admission was unrelated to the condition resulting in the cesarean delivery.
\par B.\tab A delivery procedure code should not be used for a woman who has delivered prior to admission to the hospital.  Any postpartum repairs should be coded.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM5_7}{\*\bkmkend BM5_7}5.7\tab The Postpartum Period
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab 
The postpartum period begins immediately after delivery and continues for 6 weeks following delivery.
\par B.\tab A postpartum complication is any complication occurring within the 6 week period.
\par C.\tab Chapter 11 codes may also be used to describe pregnancy-related complications after the 6 week period should the physician document that a condition is pregnancy related.
\par D.\tab Postpartum complications that occur during the same admission as the delivery are identified with a fifth digit of \'f42". Subsequent admissions for postpartum complications should identified with a fifth digit of \'f44".
\par E.\tab When the mother delivers outside the hospital prior to admission and is admitted for routine postpartum care and no complications are noted, code V24.0, Postpa
rtum care and examination immediately after delivery, should be assigned as the principal diagnosis.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM5_8}{\*\bkmkend BM5_8}5.8\tab Abortions
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab 
Fifth-digits are required for abortion categories 634-637. Fifth-digit 1, incomplete, indicates that all of the products of concepti
on have not been expelled from the uterus.  Fifth-digit 2, complete, indicates that all products of conception have been expelled from the uterus prior to the episode of care.  
\par B.\tab A code from categories 640-648 and 651-657 may be used as additional codes with an abortion code to indicate the complication leading to the abortion.
\par }\pard\plain \s24\ql \li2160\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
Fifth digit 3  is assigned with codes from these categories when used with an abortion code because the other fifth digits will not apply.  Codes from the 660-669 series are not to be used for complications of abortion.
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {C.\tab 
Code 639 is to be used for all complications following abortion.  Code 639 cannot be assigned with codes from categories 634-\tab 638.
\par D.\tab Abortion with Liveborn Fetus.  When an attempted termination of pregnancy resul
ts in a liveborn fetus assign code 644.21, Early onset of delivery, with an appropriate code from category V27, Outcome of Delivery.  The procedure code for the attempted termination of pregnancy should also be assigned.
\par E.\tab Retained Products of Conception 
following an abortion.  Subsequent admissions for retained products of conception following a spontaneous or legally induced abortion are assigned the appropriate code from category 634, Spontaneous abortion, or legally induced abortion, with a fifth digi
t of \'f41" (incomplete). This advice is appropriate even when the patient was discharged previously with a discharge diagnosis of complete abortion. 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM5_9}{\*\bkmkend BM5_9}5.9\tab 
Code 677, Late effect of complication of pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab Code 677, Lat
e effect of complication of pregnancy, childbirth, and the puerperium is for use in those cases when an initial complication of a pregnancy develops a sequelae requiring care or treatment at a future date. 
\par B.\tab This code may be used at any time after the initial postpartum period.
\par C.\tab This code, like all late effect codes, is to be sequenced following the code describing the sequelae of the complication.
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\sb180\sa180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM6}{\*\bkmkend BM6}6.\tab NEWBORN GUIDELINES
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {Definition
\par The newborn period is defined as beginning at birth and lasting through the 28th day following birth.
\par The following guidelines are provided for reporting purposes.  Hospitals may record other diagnoses as needed for internal data use.
\par GENERAL RULE
\par All clinically significant conditions noted on routine newborn examination should be coded.  A condition is clinically significant if it requires:
\par }\pard\plain \s19\ql \li720\ri0\sa180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 clinical evaluation; or
\par }\pard\plain \s20\ql \li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 therapeutic treatment; or
\par diagnostic procedures; or
\par extended length of hospital stay; or
\par increased nursing care and/or monitoring; or
\par has implications for future health care needs.
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {
Note: The newborn guidelines listed above are the same as the general coding guidelines for "other diagnoses," except for the final bullet regarding implications for future health care needs. W
hether or not a condition is clinically significant can only be determined by the physician.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM6_1}{\*\bkmkend BM6_1}6.1\tab Use of Codes V30-V\tab 39
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
When coding the birth of an infant, assign a code from categories V30-V39, according to the type of birth.  A code from this series is assigned as a principal diagnosis, and assigned only once to a newborn at the time of birth.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM6_2}{\*\bkmkend BM6_2}6.2\tab Newborn Transfers
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 If the newborn is transferred to another institution, the V30 series is not used.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM6_3}{\*\bkmkend BM6_3}6.3\tab Use of Category V29
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab Assign a code fr
om category V29, Observation and evaluation of newborns and infants for suspected conditions not found, to identify those instances when a healthy newborn is evaluated for a suspected condition that is determined after study not to be present.  Do not use
 a code from category V29 when the patient has identified signs or symptoms of a suspected problem; in such cases, code the sign or symptom.
\par B.\tab A V29 code is to be used as a secondary code after the V30, Outcome of delivery, code.  It may also be assigned a
s a principal code for readmissions or encounters when the V30 code no longer applies.  It is for use only for healthy newborns and infants for which no condition after study is found to be present.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM6_4}{\*\bkmkend BM6_4}6.4\tab Maternal Causes of Perinatal Morbidity
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Codes fr
om categories 760-763, Maternal causes of perinatal morbidity and mortality, are assigned only when the maternal condition has actually affected the fetus or newborn. The fact that the mother has an associated medical condition or experiences some complic
ation of pregnancy, labor or delivery does not justify the routine assignment of codes from these categories to the newborn record.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM6_5}{\*\bkmkend BM6_5}6.5\tab Congenital Anomalies
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Assign an appropriate code from categories 740-759, Congenital Anomalies, when a specific abno
rmality is diagnosed for an infant.  Such abnormalities may occur as a set of symptoms or multiple malformations.  A code should be assigned for each presenting manifestation of the syndrome if the syndrome is not specifically indexed in ICD-9-CM.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM6_6}{\*\bkmkend BM6_6}6.6\tab Coding of Other (Additional) Diagnoses 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab 
Assign codes for conditions that require treatment or further investigation, prolong the length of stay, or require resource utilization.
\par B.\tab Assign codes for conditions that have been specified by the physician as having implications for future health care needs.
\par }\pard\plain \s24\ql \li2160\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 NOTE:  This guideline should not be used for adult patients.
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {C.\tab Assign a code for Newborn conditions originating in the perinatal per
iod (categories 760-779), as well as complications arising during the current episode of care classified in other chapters, only if the diagnoses have been documented by the responsible physician at the time of transfer or discharge as having affected the
 fetus or newborn.
\par D.\tab Insignificant conditions or signs or symptoms that resolve without treatment are not coded.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM6_7}{\*\bkmkend BM6_7}6.7\tab Prematurity and Fetal Growth Retardation
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Codes from categories 764 and 765 should not be assigned based solely on recorded birthweigh
t or estimated gestational age, but upon the attending physician's clinical assessment of maturity of the infant. 
\par NOTE:  Since physicians may utilize different criteria in determining prematurity, do not code the diagnosis of prematurity unless the physician documents this condition.
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\sb180\sa180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM7}{\*\bkmkend BM7}7.\tab SEPTICEMIA AND SEPTIC SHOCK
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {
When the diagnosis of septicemia with shock or the diagnosis of general sepsis with septic shock is documented, code and list the septicemia first and report the septic shock code as a secondar
y condition.  The septicemia code assignment should identify the type of bacteria if it is known.
\par Sepsis and septic shock associated with abortion, ectopic pregnancy, and molar pregnancy are classified to category codes in Chapter 11 (630-639).
\par Negative or inconclusive blood cultures do not preclude a diagnosis of septicemia in patients with clinical evidence of the condition.
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\sb180\sa180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM8}{\*\bkmkend BM8}8.\tab TRAUMA
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM8_1}{\*\bkmkend BM8_1}8.1\tab Coding for Multiple Injuries
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 When coding multiple injuries such as fracture of tibia and fibula, assign separa
te codes for each injury unless a combination code is provided, in which case the combination code is assigned.  Multiple injury codes are provided in ICD-9-CM, but should not be assigned unless information for a more specific code is not available.

\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab The code for the most serious injury, as determined by the physician, is sequenced first.

\par B.\tab Superficial injuries such as abrasions or contusions are not coded when associated with more severe injuries of the same site.
\par C.\tab When a primary injury results in min
or damage to peripheral nerves or blood vessels, the primary injury is sequenced first with additional code(s) from categories 950-957, Injury to nerves and spinal cord, and/or 900-904, Injury to blood vessels.  When the primary injury is to the blood ves
sels or nerves, that injury should be sequenced first.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM8_2}{\*\bkmkend BM8_2}8.2\tab Coding for Multiple Fractures
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
The principle of multiple coding of injuries should be followed in coding multiple fractures.  Multiple fractures of specified sites are coded individually by sit
e in accordance with both the provisions within categories 800-829 and the level of detail furnished by medical record content.  Combination categories for multiple fractures are provided for use when there is insufficient detail in the medical record (su
c
h as trauma cases transferred to another hospital), when the reporting form limits the number of codes that can be used in reporting pertinent clinical data, or when there is insufficient specificity at the fourth-digit or fifth-digit level.  More specifi
c guidelines are as follows:
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab 
Multiple fractures of same limb classifiable to the same three-digit or four-digit category are coded to that category.
\par B.\tab Multiple unilateral or bilateral fractures of same bone(s) but classified to different fourth-digit subdivisions (bone part) within the same three-digit category are coded individually by site.
\par C.\tab Multiple fracture categories 819 and 828 classify bilateral fractures of both upper limbs (819) and both lower limbs (828), but without any detail at the fourth-digit level other than open and closed type of fractures.
\par D.\tab Multiple fractures are sequenced in accordance with the severity of the fracture and the physician should be asked to list the fracture diagnoses in the order of severity.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM8_3}{\*\bkmkend BM8_3}8.3\tab Current Burns and Encounters for Late Effects of Burns 

\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
Current burns (940-948) are classified by depth, extent and, if desired, by agent (E code).  By depth burns are classified as first degree (erythema), second degree (blistering), and third degree (full-thickness involvement).
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab All burns are coded with the highest degree of burn sequenced first.
\par B.\tab Classify burns of the same local site (three-digit category level, (940-947) but of different degrees to the subcategory identifying the highest degree recorded in the diagnosis.
\par C.\tab Non-healing burns are coded as acute burns.  Necrosis of burned skin should be coded as a non-healed burn.
\par D.\tab Assign code 958.3, Posttraumatic wound infection, not elsewhere classified, as an additional code for any documented infected burn site.
\par E.\tab When coding multiple burns, assign separate codes for each burn site.  Category 946 Burns of Multiple specified sites, should only be used if the location of the burns are not documented.
\par }\pard\plain \s24\ql \li2160\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Category 949, Burn, unspecified, is extremely vague and should rarely be used.
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {F.\tab Assign codes from
 category 948, Burns classified according to extent of body surface involved, when the site of the burn is not specified or when there is a need for additional data.  It is advisable to use category 948 as additional coding when needed to provide  data fo
r
 evaluating burn mortality, such as that needed by burn units.  It is also advisable to use category 948 as an additional code for reporting purposes when there is mention of a third-degree burn involving 20 percent or more of the body surface.  In assign
ing a code from category 948:
\par }\pard\plain \s25\ql \li2520\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2520\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Fourth-digit codes are used to identify the percentage of total body surface involved in a burn (all degree).

\par Fifth-digits are assigned to identify the percentage of body surface involved in third-degree burn.
\par Fifth-digit zero (0) is assigned when less than 10 percent or when no body surface is involved in a third-degree burn.
\par }\pard\plain \s24\ql \li2160\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
Category 948 is based on the classic "rule of nines" in estimating body surface involved: head and neck are assigned nine percent, each arm nine percent, 
each leg 18 percent, the anterior trunk 18 percent, posterior trunk 18 percent, and genitalia one percent.  Physicians may change these percentage assignments where necessary to accommodate infants and children who have proportionately larger heads than a
dults and patients who have large buttocks, thighs, or abdomen that involve burns.
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {G.\tab 
Encounters for the treatment of the late effects of burns (i.e., scars or joint contractures) should be coded to the residual condition (sequelae) followed by the appropri
ate late effect code (906.5-906.9).  A late effect E code may also be used, if desired.
\par H.\tab When appropriate, both a sequelae with a late effect code, and a current burn code may be assigned on the same record.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM8_4}{\*\bkmkend BM8_4}8.4\tab Debridement of Wound, Infection, or Burn
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab 
For coding purposes, excisional debridement, 86.22, is assigned only when the procedure is performed by a physician.
\par B.\tab For coding purposes, nonexcisional debridement performed by the physician or nonphysician health care professional is assigned to 86.28.  Any "excisional" type procedure performed by a nonphysician is assigned to 86.\tab 28.
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\sb180\sa180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM9}{\*\bkmkend BM9}9.\tab ADVERSE EFFECTS AND POISONING
\par }\pard\plain \s19\ql \li720\ri0\sa180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
The properties of certain drugs, medicinal and biological substances or combinations of such substances, may cause toxic reactions.  The occurrence of drug toxicity is classified in ICD-9-CM as follows:
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM9_1}{\*\bkmkend BM9_1}9.1\tab Adverse Effect
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
When the drug was correctly prescribed and properly administered, code the reaction plus the appropriate code from the E930-E949 series.
\par Adverse effects of 
therapeutic substances correctly prescribed and properly administered (toxicity, synergistic reaction, side effect, and idiosyncratic reaction) may be due to (1) differences among patients, such as age, sex, disease, and genetic factors, and (2) drug-rela
ted factors, such as type of drug, route of administration, duration of therapy, dosage, and bioavailability.
\par Codes from the E930-E949 series must be used to identify the causative substance for an adverse effect of drug, medicinal and biological substances
, correctly prescribed and properly administered.  The effect, such as tachycardia, delirium, gastrointestinal hemorrhaging, vomiting, hypokalemia, hepatitis, renal failure, or respiratory failure, is coded and followed by the appropriate code from the E9
30-E949 series.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM9_2}{\*\bkmkend BM9_2}9.2\tab Poisoning
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
Poisoning when an error was made in drug prescription or in the administration of the drug by physician, nurse, patient, or other person, use the appropriate code from the 960-979 series.  If an overdose of a drug was int
entionally taken or administered and resulted in drug toxicity, it would be coded as a poisoning (960-979 series).  If a nonprescribed drug or medicinal agent was taken in combination with a correctly prescribed and properly administered drug, any drug to
xicity or other reaction resulting from the interaction of the two drugs would be classified as a poisoning.
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\sb180\sa180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM10}{\*\bkmkend BM10}10.\tab HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS (HIV) INFECTIONS
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM10_1}{\*\bkmkend BM10_1}10.1\tab Code only confirmed cases of HIV infection/illness.

\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 This is an exception to guide
line 1.8 which states "If the diagnosis documented at the time of discharge is qualified as 'probable,' 'suspected,' 'likely,' 'questionable,' 'possible,' or 'still to be ruled out,' code the condition as if it existed or was established..."
\par In this context, "confirmation" does not require documentation of positive serology or culture for HIV; the physician's diagnostic statement that the patient is HIV positive, or has an HIV-related illness is sufficient.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM10_2}{\*\bkmkend BM10_2}10.2\tab Selection of HIV code
\par }\pard\plain \s23\ql \fi-720\li2880\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2880\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 042\tab Human Immunodeficiency Virus [HIV] Disease
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Patients with an HIV-related illness should be coded to 042, Human Immunodeficiency Virus [HIV] Disease.
\par V08\tab Asymptomatic Human Immunodeficiency Virus [HIV] Infection
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Patients with physician-documented asymptomatic HIV infections who have never had an HIV-related illness should be coded to V08, Asymptomatic Human Immunodeficiency Virus [HIV] Infection.  
\par 795.71\tab Nonspecific Serologic Evidence of Human Immunodeficiency Virus [HIV]
\par }{\fs20 \tab }{\fs20\cf1 Code 795.71, Nonspecific serologic evidence of human immunodeficiency virus [HIV], should be used for patients (including infants) with inconclusive HIV test results.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM10_3}{\*\bkmkend BM10_3}10.3\tab Previously diagnosed HIV-related illness
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Patients with any known 
prior diagnosis of an HIV-related illness should be coded to 042.  Once a patient had developed an HIV-related illness, the patient should always be assigned code 042 on every subsequent admission.  Patients previously diagnosed with any HIV illness (042)
 should never be assigned to 795.71 or V\tab 08.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM10_4}{\*\bkmkend BM10_4}10.4\tab Sequencing
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
The sequencing of diagnoses for patients with HIV-related illnesses follows guideline 2 for selection of principal diagnosis.  That is, the circumstances of admission govern the selection 
of principal diagnosis, "that condition established after study to be chiefly responsible for occasioning the admission of the patient to the hospital for care."
\par Patients who are admitted for an HIV-related illness should be assigned a minimum of two codes
: first assign code 042 to identify the HIV disease and then sequence additional codes to identify the other diagnoses.  If a patient is admitted for an HIV-related condition, the principal diagnosis should be 042, followed by additional diagnosis codes f
or all reported HIV-related conditions.
\par If a patient with HIV disease is admitted for an unrelated condition (such as a traumatic injury), the code for the unrelated condition (e.g., the nature of injury code) should be the principal diagnosis.  Other diagn
oses would be 042  followed by additional diagnosis codes for all reported HIV-related conditions.
\par Whether the patient is newly diagnosed or has had previous admissions for HIV conditions (or has expired) is irrelevant to the sequencing decision.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM10_5}{\*\bkmkend BM10_5}10.5\tab 
HIV Infection in Pregnancy, Childbirth and  the Puerperium
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
During pregnancy, childbirth or the puerperium, a patient admitted because of an HIV-related illness should receive a principal diagnosis of 647.6X, Other specified infectious and parasitic dis
eases in the mother classifiable elsewhere, but complicating the pregnancy, childbirth or the puerperium, followed by 042 and the code(s) for the HIV-related illness(es).  This is an exception to the sequencing rule found in 10.4 above.
\par Patients with asymptomatic HIV infection status admitted during pregnancy, childbirth, or the puerperium should receive codes of 647.6X and V08.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM10_6}{\*\bkmkend BM10_6}10.6\tab Asymptomatic HIV Infection
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 V08 Asymptomatic human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] infection, is to be applied when the p
atient without any documentation of symptoms is listed as being "HIV positive," "known HIV," "HIV test positive," or similar terminology.  Do not use this code if the term "AIDS" is used or if the patient is treated for any HIV-related illness or is descr
ibed as having any condition(s) resulting from his/her HIV positive status; use 042 in these cases.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM10_7}{\*\bkmkend BM10_7}10.7\tab Inconclusive Laboratory Test for HIV
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Patients with inconclusive HIV serology, but no definitive diagnosis or manifestations of the illness may b
e assigned code 795.71.Inconclusive serologic test for Human Immunodeficiency Virus [HIV]
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM10_8}{\*\bkmkend BM10_8}10.8\tab Testing for HIV
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
If the patient is asymptomatic but wishes to know his/her HIV status, use code V73.89, Screening for other specified viral disease.  Use 
code V69.8, Other problems related to lifestyle, as a secondary code if an asymptomatic patient is in a known high-risk group for HIV.  Should a patient with signs or symptoms or illness, or a confirmed HIV related diagnosis be tested for HIV code the sig
ns and symptoms or the diagnosis.  An additional counseling code V65.44 may be used if counseling is provided during the encounter for the test.
\par When the patient returns to be informed of his/her HIV test results use code V65.44, HIV counseling, if the resu
lts of the test are negative.  If the results are positive but the patient is asymptomatic use code V08, Asymptomatic HIV infection.  If  the results are positive and the patient is symptomatic use code 042, HIV infection, with codes for the HIV related s
ymptoms or diagnosis.  The HIV counseling code may also be used if counseling is provided for patients with positive test results.
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\sb180\sa180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM11}{\*\bkmkend BM11}11.\tab 
GUIDELINES FOR CODING EXTERNAL CAUSES OF INJURIES, POISONINGS AND ADVERSE EFFECTS OF DRUGS (E Codes)
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {Introduction:  Th
ese guidelines are provided for those who are currently collecting E codes in order that there will be standardization in the process.  If your institution plans to begin collecting E codes, these guidelines are to be applied.  The use of E codes are supp
lemental to the application of basic ICD-9-CM codes.  E codes are never to be recorded as principal diagnosis (first listed in the outpatient setting)  and are not required for reporting to the Health Care Financing Administration.
\par Injuries are a major caus
e of mortality, morbidity and disability.  In the United States, the care of patients who suffer intentional and unintentional injuries and poisonings contributes significantly to the increase in medical care costs.  External causes of injury and poisonin
g
 codes (E codes) are intended to provide data for injury research and evaluation of injury prevention strategies.  E codes capture how the injury or poisoning happened (cause), the intent (unintentional or accidental; or intentional, such as suicide or as
sault ), and the place where the event  occurred.  Some major categories of E codes include:\line 
\par }\pard\plain \s20\ql \li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 transport accidents 
\par poisoning and adverse effects of drugs, medicinal substances and biologicals 
\par accidental falls 
\par accidents caused by fire and flames 
\par accidents due to natural and environmental factors 
\par late effects of accidents, assaults or self injury 
\par assaults or purposely inflicted injury 
\par suicide or self inflicted injury 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {These guidelines apply for the coding and collection of  E code from records i
n hospitals, outpatient clinics, emergency departments, other ambulatory care settings and physician offices except when other specific guidelines apply.  (See  Reporting Diagnostic Guidelines for Hospital-based Outpatient Services/Reporting Requirements 
for Physician Billing.) 
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM11_1}{\*\bkmkend BM11_1}11.1\tab GENERAL E CODE CODING GUIDELINES
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab 
An E code may be used with any code in the range of 001-V82.9 which indicates an injury, poisoning, or adverse effect due to an external cause.
\par B.\tab Assign the appropriate E-code for all initial treatments of an injury, poisoning, or adverse effect of drugs.  
\par C.\tab Use a late effect E code for subsequent visits when a late effect of the initial injury or poisoning is being treated.  There is no late effect E code for adverse effects of drugs.
\par D.\tab Use the full range of E codes to completely describe the cause, the intent and the place of occurrence, if applicable, for all injuries, poisonings, and adverse effects of drugs.
\par E.\tab Assign as many E codes as necessary to fully explain each cause.  If only one E code can be recorded, assign the E code most related to the principal diagnosis.   
\par F.\tab The selection of the appropriate E code is guided by the Index to External Causes  which is located after the alphabetical index to diseases and by Inclusion and Exclusion notes in the Tabular List.
\par G.\tab An E code can never be a principal (first listed) diagnosis.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM11_2}{\*\bkmkend BM11_2}11.2\tab PLACE OF OCCURRENCE GUIDELINE
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 Use an additional code from category E849 to indicate the Place of Occurrence for injuries and poisonings.
  The Place of Occurrence describes the place where the event occurred and not the patient's activity at the time of the event.
\par Do not use E849.9 if the place of occurrence is not stated.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM11_3}{\*\bkmkend BM11_3}11.3\tab 
POISONINGS AND ADVERSE EFFECTS OF DRUGS, MEDICINAL AND BIOLOGICAL SUBSTANCES GUIDELINES
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab 
Do not code directly from the Table of Drugs and Chemicals.  Always refer back to the Tabular List.
\par B.\tab Use as many codes as necessary to describe completely all drugs, medicinal or biological substances.
\par C.\tab If the same E code would describe the causative agent for more than one adverse reaction, assign the code only once.
\par D.\tab If two or more drugs, medicinal or biological substances are reported, code each individually unless the combination code is listed in the Table of Drugs and Chemicals.  In that case, assign the E code for the combination.
\par E.\tab When a reaction results from the interaction of a drug(s) and alcohol, use poisoning codes and E codes for both. 
\par F.\tab If the reporting format limits the number of E codes that can be used in reporting clinical data, code the one most related to the principal diagnosis.  Include at least one from each category (cause, intent, place) if possible.
\par }\pard\plain \s24\ql \li2160\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 If there are different fourth digit codes in the same three digit category, use the code 
for "Other specified" of that category.  If there is no "Other specified" code in that category, use the appropriate "Unspecified" code in that category.
\par If the codes are in different three digit categories, assign the appropriate E code for other multiple drugs and medicinal substances.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM11_4}{\*\bkmkend BM11_4}11.4\tab MULTIPLE CAUSE E CODE CODING GUIDELINES
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
If two or more events cause separate injuries, an E code should be assigned for each cause.  The first listed E code will be selected in the following order:
\par }\pard\plain \s22\ql \li1800\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1800\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 E codes for child and adult abuse take priority over all other E codes- see Child and Adult abuse guidelines

\par E codes for cataclysmic events take priority over all other e codes except child and adult abuse
\par E codes for transport accidents take priority over all other e codes except cataclysmic events and child and adult abuse
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
The first list E code should correspond to the cause of the most serious diagnosis due to an assault, accident, or self-harm, following the order of hierarchy listed above.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM11_5}{\*\bkmkend BM11_5}11.5\tab CHILD AND ADULT ABUSE GUIDELINE
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab 
When the cause of an injury or neglect is intentional child or adult abuse,  the first listed e code should be assigned from categories E960-E968, Homicide and injury purposely inflicted by other persons, (except categor
y E967).  An E code from category E967, Child and adult battering and other maltreatment, should be added as an additional code to identify the perpetrator, if known.
\par B.\tab In cases of neglect when the intent is determined to be accidental E code E904.0, Abandonment or neglect of infant and helpless person, should be the first listed E code.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM11_6}{\*\bkmkend BM11_6}11.6\tab UNKNOWN OR SUSPECTED INTENT GUIDELINE
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab 
 If the intent (accident, self-harm, assault) of the cause of an injury or poisoning is unknown or unspecified, code the intent as undetermined E980-E989.
\par B.\tab  If the intent (accident, self-harm, assault) of the cause of an injury or poisoning is questionable, probable or suspected, code the intent as undetermined E980-E989.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM11_7}{\*\bkmkend BM11_7}11.7\tab UNDETERMINED CAUSE
\par }\pard\plain \s21\ql \li1440\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 When the intent
 of an injury or poisoning is known, but the cause is unknown, use codes: E928.9, Unspecified accident, E958.9, Suicide and self-inflicted injury by unspecified means, and E968.9, Assault by unspecified means.  
\par These E codes should rarely be used as the documentation in the medical record, in both the inpatient and outpatient settings, should normally provide sufficient detail to determine the cause of the injury.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM11_8}{\*\bkmkend BM11_8}11.8\tab LATE EFFECTS OF EXTERNAL CAUSE GUIDELINES
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab Late effect E codes exist for injur
ies and poisonings but not for adverse effects of drugs, misadventures and surgical complications.
\par B.\tab A late effect E code (E929, E959, E969, E977, E989, or E999) should be used with any report of a late effect or sequela resulting from a previous injury or poisoning (905-909).
\par C.\tab A late effect E code should never be used with a related current nature of injury code.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM11_9}{\*\bkmkend BM11_9}11.9\tab MISADVENTURES AND COMPLICATIONS OF CARE GUIDELINES

\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab Assign a code in the range of E870-E876 if misadventures are stated by the physician.
\par B.\tab Assign a code in the range of E878-E879 if the physician attributes an abnormal reaction or later complication to a surgical or medical procedure, but does not mention misadventure at the time of the procedure as the cause of the reaction.
\par }\pard\plain \s16\ql \fi-720\li720\ri0\sb180\sa180\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {{\*\bkmkstart BM12}{\*\bkmkend BM12}12\tab 
DIAGNOSTIC CODING AND REPORTING GUIDELINES FOR OUTPATIENT SERVICES (HOSPITAL-BASED AND PHYSICIAN OFFICE)
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\cf0 \tab }{Revised October 1, 1995
\par Introduction
\par These revised coding guidelines for outpatient diagnoses have been approved for use by hospitals/physicians 
in coding and reporting hospital-based outpatient services and physician office visits.  These guidelines replace the official guidelines on the October 1, 1994 CD-ROM.
\par Information about the use of certain abbreviations, punctuation, symbols, and other con
ventions used in the ICD-9-CM Tabular List (code numbers and titles), can be found in the section at the beginning of the ICD-9-CM on "Conventions Used in the Tabular List."  Information about the correct sequence to use in finding a code is described in 
the \'f4Introduction\'f6 to the Alphabetic Index of ICD-9-CM.  
\par The terms encounter and visit are often used interchangeably in describing outpatient service contacts and, therefore, appear together in these guidelines without distinguishing one from the other.
\par Coding guidelines for outpatient and physician reporting of diagnoses will vary in a number of instances from those for inpatient diagnoses, recognizing that:
\par The Uniform Hospital Discharge Data Set (UHDDS) definition of principal diagnosis applies only to inpatients in acute, short-term, general hospitals. 
\par Coding guidelines for inconclusive diagnoses (probable, suspected, rule out, etc.) were developed for inpatient reporting and do not apply to outpatients.
\par Diagnoses often are not established at the time of the initial encounter/visit.  It may take two or more visits before the diagnosis is confirmed.
\par The most critical rule involves beginning the search for the correct code assignment through the Alphabetic Index.  Never begin searching initially in the Tabular List as this will lead to coding errors.
\par }\pard\plain \s17\ql \fi-720\li1440\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin1440\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {BASIC CODING GUIDELINES FOR OUTPATIENT SERVICES
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {A.\tab 
The appropriate code or codes from 001.0 through V82.9 must be used to identify diagnoses, symptoms, conditions, problems, complaints, or other reason(s) for the encounter/visit.
\par B.\tab For accurate reporting of ICD-9-CM diagnosis codes, the documentation should describe the patient's condition, using terminology which includes specific diagnoses as well as symptoms, 
problems, or reasons for the encounter.  There are ICD-9-CM codes to describe all of these.
\par C.\tab The selection of codes 001.0 through 999.9 will frequently be used to describe the reason for the encounter. These codes are from the section of ICD-9-CM for the
 classification of diseases and injuries (e.g. infectious and parasitic diseases; neoplasms; symptoms, signs, and ill-defined conditions,  etc.).  
\par D.\tab Codes that describe symptoms and signs, as opposed to diagnoses, are acceptable for reporting purposes wh
en an established diagnosis has not been diagnosed (confirmed) by the physician.  Chapter 16 of ICD-9-CM, Symptoms, Signs, and Ill-defined conditions (codes 780.0 - 799.9) contain many, but not all codes for symptoms.
\par E.\tab ICD-9-CM provides codes to deal wit
h encounters for circumstances other than a disease or injury.  The Supplementary Classification of factors Influencing Health Status and Contact with Health Services (V01.0-  V82.9) is provided to deal with occasions when circumstances other than a disea
se or injury are recorded as diagnosis or problems.  
\par F.\tab ICD-9-CM is composed of codes with either 3, 4, or 5 digits. Codes with 3 digits are included in ICD-9-CM as  the heading of a category of codes that  may be further subdivided by the use of fourth an
d/or fifth digits which provide greater specificity.
\par }\pard\plain \s24\ql \li2160\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
A three-digit code is to be used only if it is not further subdivided.  Where fourth-digit subcategories and/or fifth-digit subclassifications are provided, they must be assigned.  A code is invalid if i
t has not been coded to the full number of digits required for that code.
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {G\tab 
.List first the ICD-9-CM code for the diagnosis, condition, problem, or other reason for encounter/visit shown in the medical record to be chiefly responsible for the services provided.  List additional codes that describe any coexisting conditions.

\par H.\tab Do not code diagnoses documented as "probable",  "suspected," "questionable," "rule out," or  working diagnosis.  Rather, code the condition(s) to the highest degree of certainty for 
that encounter/visit, such as symptoms, signs, abnormal test results, or other reason for the visit.
\par }\pard\plain \s24\ql \li2160\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
Please note: This is contrary to the coding practices used by hospitals and medical record departments for coding the diagnosis of hospital inpatients. 
\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {I.\tab 
Chronic diseases treated on an ongoing basis may be coded and reported as many times as the patient receives treatment and care for the condition(s).
\par J.\tab Code all documented conditions that coexist at the time of the encounter/visit, and require or affect 
patient care treatment or management.  Do not code conditions that were  previously treated and no longer exist.  However, history codes (V10- V19) may be used as secondary codes if the historical condition or family history has an impact on current care 
or influences treatment.
\par K.\tab For patients receiving diagnostic services only during an encounter/visit, sequence first the diagnosis, condition, problem, or other reason for encounter/visit shown in the medical record to be chiefly responsible for the outpat
ient services provided during the encounter/visit. Codes for other diagnoses (e.g., chronic conditions) may be sequenced as additional diagnoses.  
\par L.\tab For patients receiving therapeutic services only during an encounter/visit, sequence first the diagnosis,
 condition, problem, or other reason for encounter/visit shown in the medical record to be chiefly responsible for the outpatient services provided during the encounter/visit. Codes for other diagnoses (e.g., chronic conditions) may be sequenced as additi
onal diagnoses.  
\par }\pard\plain \s24\ql \li2160\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs20\cf1 
The only exception to this rule is that patients receiving chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or rehabilitation, the appropriate V code for the service is listed first, and the diagnosis or problem for which the service is being performed listed second.

\par }\pard\plain \s18\ql \fi-720\li2160\ri0\sb180\sa85\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin2160\itap0 \f1\fs20\cf1\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {N.\tab 
For patient's receiving preoperative evaluations only, sequence a code from category V72.8, Other specified examinations, to describe the pre-op consultations.  Assign a code for the condition to describe the reason for the surgery as an ad
ditional diagnosis.  Code also any findings related to the pre-op evaluation.
\par O.\tab For ambulatory surgery, code the diagnosis for which the surgery was performed. If the postoperative diagnosis is known to be different from the preoperative diagnosis at the 
time the diagnosis is confirmed, select the postoperative diagnosis for coding, since it is the most definitive.
\par }}