             International Classification of Diseases

                     ---   9th Revision   ---

                       Clinical Modification

                               2000

                            (ICD-9-CM)

                       in Rich Text Format


Note: this document is best viewed in a fixed width font.  

The files listed below include the entire text of "The
International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical
Modification" (ICD-9-CM), Sixth Edition, issued for use beginning
October 1, 2000 for federal fiscal year 2001 (FY01).  The 
ICD-9-CM is maintained jointly by the National Center for Health
Statistics (NCHS) and the Health Care Financing Agency (HCFA).  

These files are in Rich Text Format and may be imported into most
word processors with indentation intact.  These files come from
the official version of the ICD-9-CM, which is available on
CD-ROM from the U.S. Government Printing Office, (202) 512-1800, 
order number 017-022-01499-8.  This CD-ROM includes Folio 
Corporation's VIEWS (tm) software, which features keyword 
searching and hypertext linking.

These files are available on the Internet, in a compressed
format.  See the NCHS web site on classification of disease for
information, uniform resource locator (URL):

http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/icd9.htm

This NCHS web site also has a Conversion Table for 1986-2000 in
Adobe Acrobat (tm) PDF format.  For downloading of other files
listed below, this site has links to the following FTP site, URL: 

ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/Health_Statistics/NCHS/Publications/ICD9-CM

The most recent 2000 files will be in a subdirectory of this site
labelled 2000.  Earlier files will be in subdirectories identified 
by the year.  

Separate files for the preface, and the official ICD-9-CM
Guidelines are in RTF files.  The other files included in this
distribution have been compressed using Info-Zip's WiZ utility,
version 5.0.1 (for Windows), which is compatible with PKZIP
and PKUNZIP programs.  The utility WiZ and similar zip and unzip
utilities for different operating systems are freely available
from the following site, which also has links to other sites
related to compression software, URL:  

http://www.info-zip.org/pub/infozip/

When extracted, the file names and sizes should be as given in
the following table.  Any files other than this one 
(README01.TXT) and the ones listed below, even if included in 
the same directory, will not be directly related to the ICD.  

Filename       Size in  Expanded      Expanded   Description
               bytes    Files         File
                                      Sizes
------------   -------  ------------  ---------  ----------------
APPNDX01.ZIP    88,281  DMORPH01.RTF    105,500  Appendix A, 
                                                 Morphology of 
                                                 Neoplasms
                        DMENT01.RTF     257,372  Appendix B,
                                                 Glossary of
                                                 Mental Disorders
                        DDRGCL01.RTF     26,331  Appendix C, 
                                                 Classification 
                                                 of Drugs
                        DINDST01.RTF     21,521  Appendix D, 
                                                 Classification 
                                                 of Industrial 
                                                 Accidents
                        DC_3D01.RTF     125,127  Appendix E, List
                                                 of Three-Digit 
                                                 Categories
DDRUGS01.ZIP    63,035  DDRUGS01.RTF    503,623  Table of Drugs 
                                                 and Chemicals
DINDEX01.ZIP   810,515  DINDEX01.RTF  6,854,735  Index to 
                                                 Diseases
EINDEX01.ZIP    40,292  EINDEX01.RTF    387,214  Index to 
                                                 External Causes
DTAB01.ZIP     507,469  DTAB01.RTF    6,990,967  Tabular List of 
                                                 Diseases
GUIDE01.RTF    115,724  ---           ---        Guidelines
PINDEX01.ZIP   193,514  PINDEX01.RTF  1,694,717  Index to 
                                                 Procedures
PREFAC01.RTF    31,978  ---           ---        Preface
PTAB01.ZIP     147,959  PTAB01.RTF    2,049,984  Tabular List of 
                                                 Procedures

Questions and comments regarding the function or format of these 
files should be addressed to the Data Dissemination Branch, 
National Center for Health Statistics, at (301) 458-4636, or 
using a web browser that supports forms, at the following NCHS
web site, URL:  

http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/mail/mail.htm

Coding questions should be submitted to:

  Coding Advice
  Central Office on ICD-9-CM
  American Hospital Association
  One North Franklin
  Chicago, IL 60606

The phone number for the Central Office on ICD-9-CM is:  
(312) 422-3366.  The fax number is (312) 422-4583.  They do not 
accept phone inquiries.

Details about how to submit questions on coding are available
from the Central Office on ICD-9-CM web site, URL:

http://www.icd-9-cm.org/codereq.htm

