             International Classification of Diseases

                     ---   9th Revision   ---

                       Clinical Modification

                               2003

                            (ICD-9-CM)

                       in Rich Text Format


Note: this document is best viewed in a fixed width font.  

The files listed below include the text of "The International 
Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical Modification" 
(ICD-9-CM), Sixth Edition, issued for use beginning October 1, 
2003 for federal fiscal year 2004 (FY04).  The ICD-9-CM is 
maintained jointly by the National Center for Health Statistics 
(NCHS) and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS). 

These files are in Rich Text Format and may be imported into most
word processors with indentation intact.  These files come from
the official version of the ICD-9-CM, which is available on
CD-ROM from the U.S. Government Printing Office, (202) 512-1800, 
order number 017-022-01544-7.  

This CD-ROM includes Folio 
VIEWS (tm) software, which features keyword searching and 
hypertext linking.

These files are available on the Internet, in a compressed
format.  See the NCHS web site on classification of disease for
information, uniform resource locator (URL):

http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/icd9.htm

This NCHS web site also has links to a Conversion Table for 
1986-2003, and to the Official Guidelines for ICD-9-CM, in Adobe 
Acrobat (tm) PDF format.  For downloading of other files listed 
below, this site has links to the following FTP site, URL: 

ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/Health_Statistics/NCHS/Publications/ICD9-CM

The most recent 2003 files will be in a subdirectory of this site
labeled 2003.  Earlier files will be in subdirectories identified 
by the year.  

The preface is in a separate RTF file.  Other files included in 
this distribution have been compressed to a ".zip" format, which 
is compatible with PKZIP and PKUNZIP, as well as many other data 
compression and decompression programs. 

The following table lists file names and sizes when extracted for 
the ICD-9-CM files available by FTP, for use as of October 1, 
2003, for federal fiscal year 2004 (FY04).  

Filename       Size in  Expanded      Expanded   Description
               bytes    Files         File
                                      Sizes
------------   -------  ------------  ---------  ----------------
APPNDX04.ZIP    91,603  Dmorph04.RTF    107,853  Appendix A, 
                                                 Morphology of 
                                                 Neoplasms
                        Dment04.RTF     296,971  Appendix B,
                                                 Glossary of
                                                 Mental Disorders
                        Ddrgcl04.RTF     31,365  Appendix C, 
                                                 Classification 
                                                 of Drugs
                        Dindst04.RTF     23,211  Appendix D, 
                                                 Classification 
                                                 of Industrial 
                                                 Accidents
                        Dc_3d04.RTF     130,758  Appendix E, List
                                                 of Three-Digit 
                                                 Categories
DDRUGS04.ZIP    63,716  Ddrugs04.RTF    535,958  Table of Drugs 
                                                 and Chemicals
DINDEX04.ZIP   819,799  Dindex04.RTF  7,321,831  Index to 
                                                 Diseases
EINDEX04.ZIP    43,489  Eindex04.RTF    454,408  Index to 
                                                 External Causes
DTAB04.ZIP     525,173  Dtab04.RTF    7,536,114  Tabular List of 
                                                 Diseases
PINDEX04.ZIP   199,744  Pindex04.RTF  1,862,839  Index to 
                                                 Procedures
PTAB04.ZIP     161,724  Ptab04.RTF    2,425,810  Tabular List of 
                                                 Procedures
Prefac04.RTF    32,666  ---              ---     Preface
Vcode04.ZIP     12,372  Vcode04.RTF       3,551  V Code Table

Questions and comments regarding the function or format of these 
files should be addressed to the Data Dissemination Branch, 
National Center for Health Statistics, at (301) 458-4636, or 
using a web browser that supports forms, at the following NCHS
web site, URL:  

http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/mail/mail.htm

Coding questions should be submitted to:

  Coding Advice
  Central Office on ICD-9-CM
  American Hospital Association
  One North Franklin
  Chicago, IL 60606

The phone number for the Central Office on ICD-9-CM is:  
(312) 422-3366.  The fax number is (312) 422-4583.  They do not 
accept phone inquiries.

Details about how to submit questions on coding are available
from the Central Office on ICD-9-CM web site, URL:

http://www.hospitalconnect.com/ahacentraloffice/askicd9.jsp
